Stabilize messaging semantic conventions for tracing (#192)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/trace/0192-messaging-semantic-conventions-spec.md

## Proposed stable messaging semantic conventions for tracing

### Terminology

The terminology used in this document is based on the [CloudEvents specification](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/v1.0.1/spec.md).
CloudEvents is hosted by the CNCF and provides a specification for describing
event data in common formats to provide interoperability across services,
platforms and systems.

#### Message

A "message" is a transport envelope for the transfer of information. The
information is a combination of a payload and metadata. Metadata can be
directed at consumers or at intermediaries on the message path. Messages are
transferred via one or more intermediaries.  Messages are uniquely
identifiable.

In the strict sense, a _message_ is a payload that is sent to a specific
destination, whereas an _event_ is a signal emitted by a component upon
reaching a given state. This document is agnostic of those differences and uses
the term "message" in a wider sense to cover both concepts.

#### Producer

The "producer" is a specific instance, process or device that creates and
publishes a message. "Publishing" is the process of sending a message or batch

> to the intermediary or consumer.

Author: Good call, fixed according to the discussion we had: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/173#discussion_r729120960

#### Consumer

A "consumer" receives the message and acts upon it. It uses the context and
data to execute some logic, which might lead to the occurrence of new events.

The consumer receives, processes, and settles a message. "Receiving" is the
process of obtaining a message from the intermediary, "processing" is the
process of acting on the information a message contains, "settling" is the
process of notifying an intermediary that a message was processed successfully.

#### Intermediary

> An "intermediary" receives a message to forward it to the next receiver, which

Author: Updated to the wording of the CloudEvents spec:

> for the purpose of forwarding it to the next receiver

Producing and consuming a message involves five stages:

```
                               CONSUMER

                   . . . . . . Settle
PRODUCER           .              ^
                   .              |
Create             .           Process
  |                v              ^
  v        +--------------+       |            
Publish -> | INTERMEDIARY | -> Receive
           +--------------+
```

1. The producer creates a message.
2. The producer publishes the message to an intermediary.
3. The consumer receives the message from an intermediary.
4. The consumer processes the message.
5. The consumer settles the message by notifying the intermediary that the
   message was processed. In some cases (fire-and-forget), the settlement stage
   does not exist.

The semantic conventions described below define how to model those stages in
traces, how to propagate context, and how to enrich traces with attributes.

### Context propagation

Two layers of context propagation are required for messaging workflows:

1. The _creation context layer_ allows to correlate the producer and consumers of
   a message, regardless of intermediary instrumentation. The creation context

>    is created by the producer and must be propagated to the consumers. It must not

Author: This is intended to be explanatory, not normative text. The normative text is the one below, which covers what is mentioned here, in a more concise form.

I'll think about a better way to separate descriptive and normative sections.

   be altered by intermediaries.

   This layer helps to model dependencies between producers and consumers,
   regardless of the underlying messaging transport mechanism and its
   instrumentation.
2. The _transport context layer_ allows to correlate the producer and the
   consumer with an intermediary. If there are more than one intermediaries,

>    it allows to correlate intermediaries among each other. The transport context

Author: I changed this to:

> It also allows to correlate multiple intermediaries among each other.

>    might be changed by intermediaries, according to intermediary instrumentations.

Author: > I'm also a bit confused by intermediaries might change the context. Do you mean by this that between each hop, the message metadata will carry a different span context?

Yes, that can be case for the transport context. But not for the creation context.

>    might be changed by intermediaries, according to intermediary instrumentations.

Author: > And if I got it right, also somehow indicate that the new span has to be altered in the message metadata?

I tried to focus this section explicitly on context propagation, and not mingle it with span creation. The main intent of this section is to explicate why there are two layers of context, and how they need to be propagated.

Of course this is related to requirements for span creation, but I think we should treat those things separately in the conventions.

>    might be changed by intermediaries, according to intermediary instrumentations.

Author: Closing this conversation, as all transport layer related wording has been removed to the "Future possibilities" section.

from the current [experimental](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md#experimental)
to a [stable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md#stable)
state.

This OTEP is based on [OTEP 0173](0173-messaging-semantic-conventions.md),
which defines basic terms and describes messaging scenarios that should be
supported by messaging semantic conventions.

## Motivation

This OTEP serves as a foundation for a first stable version of [messaging semantic conventions for tracing](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/a1a8676a43dce6a4e447f65518aef8e98784306c/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md).
It aims to define clear, consistent, and extensible conventions, it also
describes reasons and motivations that led to the formulation of those
conventions. The conventions comprise areas such as context propagation, span

> structure, names, and attributes.

Reviewer: I would also add "trace structure" or "possible relationship between spans" or something similar.
IMO - describing the valid parent-child relationship is a major part of the new spec

Author: I intended to cover this by the term "span structure", but I'll replace it with "trace structure" if that's more clear.

After this OTEP is merged, the changes it proposes will be merged into the
messaging semantic conventions, which will subsequently be declared
[stable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md#stable).

## Proposed stable messaging semantic conventions for tracing

### Terminology

The terminology used in this document is based on the [CloudEvents specification](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/v1.0.1/spec.md).
CloudEvents is hosted by the CNCF and provides a specification for describing
event data in common formats to provide interoperability across services,
platforms and systems.

#### Message

A "message" is a transport envelope for the transfer of information. The
information is a combination of a payload and metadata. Metadata can be

> directed at consumers or intermediaries on the message path. Messages are

Reviewer: What do you mean by "directed at consumers or intermediaries on the message path"?

Author: It means that the metadata on a message can be used either by:
1. the consumer, or
2. intermediaries that process and forward messages.

> transferred via one or more intermediaries.  Messages are uniquely

Reviewer: I think it is also possible to have messaging systems with no intermediaries at all.
For example: [socket.io](https://socket.io/docs/v4/broadcasting-events/) and [ZeroMQ](https://learning-0mq-with-pyzmq.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pyzmq/patterns/pubsub.html).
They both allow "pub-sub" behaviour which IMO falls under the messaging system spec, but do not involve any intermediary

Author: We brought this up in some discussions, and decided that at least one intermediary is required for this conventions to apply: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/173#discussion_r729120960

identifiable.

In the strict sense, a _message_ is a payload that is sent to a specific
destination, whereas an _event_ is a signal emitted by a component upon
reaching a given state. This document is agnostic of those differences and uses
the term "message" in a wider sense to cover both concepts.

#### Producer

The "producer" is a specific instance, process or device that creates and
publishes a message. "Publishing" is the process of sending a message or batch
to the intermediary.

#### Consumer

A "consumer" receives the message and acts upon it. It uses the context and
data to execute some logic, which might lead to the occurrence of new messages.

The consumer receives, processes, and settles a message. "Receiving" is the
process of obtaining a message from the intermediary, "processing" is the
process of acting on the information a message contains, "settling" is the

> process of notifying an intermediary that a message was processed successfully.

Reviewer: How do we treat "nack" like operations (negative acknowledgment)? For example, in [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/nack.html).
Is settlement only relevant for successful processing? or does it also cover failures?

Reviewer 2: I think this can be addressed if we broaden the definition of settling to be more inline with how AMQP's use of the term, which is, to quote [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Message_Queuing_Protocol)"
> Settlement ensures that the sender and receiver agree on the state of the transfer, providing reliability guarantees.

AMQP supports settlement states (dispositions) of accepted (ack), rejected (usually what people mean by nack), released (a sort of special nack), and others. The `Status` in a span could be used to indicate the outcome of the settlement.

traces, how to propagate context, and how to enrich traces with attributes.

### Context propagation

Two layers of context propagation need to be distinguished for messaging
workflows:

1. The _creation context layer_ allows correlating the producer with the
   consumers of a message, regardless of intermediary instrumentation. The
   creation context is created by the producer and must be propagated to the
   consumers. It must not be altered by intermediaries.

   This layer helps to model dependencies between producers and consumers,
   regardless of the underlying messaging transport mechanism and its
   instrumentation.
2. The _transport context layer_ allows correlating the producer and the
   consumer with an intermediary. It also allows to correlate multiple
   intermediaries among each other. The transport context can be changed by
   intermediaries, according to intermediary instrumentations. Intermediaries
   that are not instrumented might simply drop the transport context.

   This layer helps to gain insights into details of the message transport.

A producer MUST attach a creation context to each message. The creation context

> MUST be attached in a way so that it is not changed by intermediaries. A

Reviewer: Since it's not always supported by the protocol, I suggest changing "MUST" to "SHOULD", or adding a note that it is required whenever possible, but might be missing.

> MUST be attached in a way so that it is not changed by intermediaries. A

Author: That's an interesting proposal, let's discuss it on Thursday. It would require packing both `traceparent` and `tracestate` itself into the `msgCreate` section of `tracestate`.

> MUST be attached in a way so that it is not changed by intermediaries. A

Reviewer 2: The need to encode `tracestate` at a point in time within a `tracestate` key/value pair does make this a lot less attractive. I had assumed the full SpanContext wouldn't be required for a link, but looking at both the Tracing API spec and the protobuf definition for a Span message, I see the `tracestate` is in fact shown.

It isn't clear to me what use `tracestate` has in  link. I wouldn't expect it is used to identify a span in a back end system, would it? Practically speaking if `tracestate` is omitted in a Span, what functionality might be lost?

> MUST be attached in a way so that it is not changed by intermediaries. A

Author: https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header

`tracestate` is used to encode vendor specific trace identification information (which is not covered by `traceparent`). [According to the spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#mutating-the-tracestate-field) (at least that's my reading), `tracestate` always needs to be passed along if it's present. Which makes sense, as the encoded information might be required by some vendors.

[W3C baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) might be another option for doing what you laid out. However, I'm not convinced about putting both `traceparent` and `tracestate` into the baggage headers.

I will check with W3C folks whether they are fine with updating the W3C AMQP and MQTT spec drafts so they meet our requirements. If that's a possibility, I think that's the best way to go.

> MUST be attached in a way so that it is not changed by intermediaries. A

Author: This discussion can be postponed, as supporting the transport context was added as a future work item.

producer MAY propagate a transport context to an intermediary.  An
intermediary MAY propagate a transport context to a consumer.

### Span structure, names, and attributes

#### Consumer

For many use cases, it is not possible to rely on the presence of "Process"
spans for correlating producer with consumer traces: there are cases where a
dedicated processing operation cannot be identified, or where processing
happens in a different trace. Furthermore, processing operations often are not
covered by messaging libraries and SDKs, but take place in application code.
Consistently creating spans for "Processing" operations would require either
effort from the application owner to correctly instrument those operations, or
additional capabilities of messaging libraries and SDKs (e. g. hooks for
processing callbacks, which can then be instrumented by the libraries or SDKs).

> 

Reviewer: I would also add (for documentation in this OTEP) that we can possibly have more than one "process" span per message.
correlating the consumer and producer based only on "process" requires a more complicated and error prone logic in tracing backends:
- backends need to aggregate spans to create a complete trace. this aggregation is heuristic by nature (how much time should we wait for spans to arrive?) and can be computationally expensive.
- backends need to traverse the trace and identify relevant "process" spans for each "receive". Even if "process" is a direct child of "receive", they still need to be filtered from possibly other transport and batch operation spans.
- In the presence of more than one "process" span per message, backends need to apply some filtering logic to drop duplicated occurrences of the same "create" context. While it is technically possible, it makes processing more complex

Author: I think we might add some more information about creating "Process" spans to the OTEP (although we won't require the creation of "Process" spans).  The proposed additions in this comment can then be considered there.

However, I think it requires some more discussions before we can do that.

Author: I would suggest extending the conventions by recommendations for creating process spans after semantic conventions are stabilized (this will be possible, as process spans will not be mandatory anyway). This would help us to gather some user experience and make more informed decisions later on. Let's discuss this in one of the next workgroup meetings.

While it is possible to create "Process" spans and correlate those with
consumer traces in certain cases, this is not something that can be generally

> required. Therefore, it is more feasible to require the creation of "Deliver"

Author: According to discussions in today's workgroup, the "Receive" spans is renamed to "Deliver".

> spans to correlate producer with consumer traces. A "Deliver" span must link

Reviewer 3: linking to the create span is problematic for poll-based messaging systems because links can only be added when span starts.

Is the proposal here to start delivery span when receive is done and messages are pulled from the intermediary? 

If it still traces the whole `client.receive` call, then we should 

- **Option 1: describe how the span is delayed.** Note that in this case any nested transport spans are not children of the Delivery and any nested logs can't be correlated.
  - client.receive starts, instrumentation stores timestamp
  - any logs here are not correlated (have ambient contexT)
  - transport spans (are children of ambient context, likely to be root)  
  - *Delivery* span - starts when pull-based `client.receive` ends (so *Create* contexts are known), instrumentation may 'fix' timestamp to pretend it started earlier

- **Option 2: allow links to be added after span starts**, but it gets us into sampling conversation.
- **Option 3: add more spans** to guarantee mixture of parent/child and links relationships, e.g.:
   
  *Receive* span - describes pull-based `client.receive()` call (no links on it)
     - nested transport spans (children of *Receive*)
     - any logs here are correlated to *Receive*
     - *Delivery* span - describes the short delivery aspect of it,  **links to *Create***

I think option 2 is better in the long-term as it keeps instrumentation to the minimum: it's less verbose (cheaper for users) and has better performance.

Reviewer 3: I've tried to capture pull semantics in [this doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhYvoHsd-lfiwNtJ6dUIBiP4fxyBmI8FLj1C6xR-kFg/edit?usp=sharing) including these options in more detail. Let's discuss it over the next meeting once we have a quorum.

Author: Thanks for coming up with that detailed analysis, let's discuss this in the next workgroup meeting.

Author: I currently wrote conventions in the OTEP for going with Option 2. I also created a PR for allowing adding links after span creation: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2278

If that PR is not approved, we will re-iterate and discuss alternative solutions.

to the "Create" spans of all messages that are handled by the respective
"Receive" operation. Depending on the use case, "Receive" spans can correlate

> with "Process" spans or other spans modelling processing operations.

Reviewer: I would suggest that we state the exact details of this correlation in the specification, so tracing backends can rely on some consistent logic to process messaging traces.

My suggestion is to always "link" from the "process" span to the "receive" span. This is useful in cases of ambient context and broken traces, where "process" and "receive" can potentially reside in different traces or not have a parent-child relationship.

Author: I wonder if other people think that there are cases where it is beneficial to model "Process" spans as children of "Receive" spans. It seems to me there are such cases, if so we probably shouldn't prohibit that.

Author: Refer to https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192#discussion_r799879951 for further discussion.

The operation modelled by the "Deliver" span does not strictly refer to
receiving the message from intermediaries, but instead refers to the

> application receiving messages for processing. If messages are fetched from the

Author: An open point from today's workgroup discussion:

The duration of a "Deliver" span as specified here might involve the duration of "Process" spans (e. g. when the "Deliver" span is created for a callback invocation and messages are processed in that callback). However, for some scenarios the duration of the "Deliver" span does not involve the duration of "Process" spans (e. g. when the "Deliver" span is just created for a call that passes messages to the application for processing, and "Process" spans are created after the "Deliver" operation ends).

Some questions need to be answered:
* Is it a problem that the "Deliver" span can have those different semantic meanings?
* Should we distinguish both scenarios? If yes, how? Span names, or attributes?

@lmolkova @blumamir

Reviewer 3: > Is it a problem that the "Deliver" span can have those different semantic meanings?

I believe yes - from user (e,g, Ops or new engineer on the team) perspective if I just look at spans without enough knowledge of the codebase, I should be able to tell if this span (duration, outcome) covers the whole processing or just delivery. So these two have different semantics. 

> Should we distinguish both scenarios? If yes, how? Span names, or attributes?

I propose to start with different names (as we didn't yet start to discuss attributes).
`Delivery` seems to precisely describe passing events to the application, but only it.  'Process' is very precise in describing what happens in the callback.

Reviewer 3: Another way (i believe on top of naming) is to have different kinds: 
- Deliver that involves delivery only is CLIENT or INTERNAL span
- Processing is a CONSUMER span 

BTW looking into [SpanKind](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind) definitions - we'll need to sync them along with messaging stabilization

Author: This concern should be covered by having different span names for pull ("Receive") and push ("Deliver") based scenarios.

intermediary and forwarded to the application in one go, the whole operation
might be covered by a "Receive" span. However, clients might pre-fetch messages
from intermediaries and cache those messages, and only forward messages to the

> application at a later time. In this case, the operation of pre-fetching and

Reviewer: Interesting use case. Can you please link to a system \ client library that implements this behavior?

Author: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/azure.messaging.eventhubs.consumer.readeventoptions.prefetchcount?view=azure-dotnet

https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-41%3A+KafkaConsumer+Max+Records#KIP41:KafkaConsumerMaxRecords-Prefetching

> application at a later time. In this case, the operation of pre-fetching and

Author: > If the SDK implementation is receiving and delivering as a single operation, might it make sense to suggest it can skip the SDK Receive and implement only SDK Deliver?

Possibly, yes. My suggestion here is, that we don't put too many limitations on instrumenting the transport layer (the SDK Receive), but rather leave some freedom for SDK instrumentors to cover their use cases (which might differ a lot between SDKs), while still providing a common ground all those different SDK instrumentations can build on (e. g. the "Receive" span in the draft, we might rename it to avoid confusion).

I suggest keeping transport and application layer operations (receive and deliver) separate, but if SDK instrumentors feel compelled to cover both by the same span, I think the spec shouldn't prohibit that.

> This suggests Process could replace Deliver and Settle (where Status could carry ack/nack information). Just because this is possible, should this be done?

 I don't think so. I think we should strive for some communality between all different scenarios. I think a "Deliver" (or "Receive" span, as it's called in the draft) could be such a communality. Implementing "Process" spans is something we might suggest and recommend, but it's not something we can require.

> application at a later time. In this case, the operation of pre-fetching and

Author: This should be covered by covering two scenarios (pull and push based) in the conventions.

caching should not be covered by the "Deliver" span.

"Deliver" spans SHOULD be created for all messages obtained by or passed to the

> application for processing. "Deliver" spans MUST NOT be created for messages

Reviewer 3: I don't think it's a feasible requirement to satisfy:

> "Deliver" spans MUST NOT be created for messages not forwarded to the application

E.g. Azure EventHubs SDK is multi-component and the Processor part of it calls into the Receiver package. Receiver package does not know if `receive` call is made by user or another SDK.

Same with Kafka: [poll call](https://www.tutorialkart.com/apache-kafka/kafka-consumer-with-example-java-application/) does not know if it's executed by the user or 3rd party [Spring Kafka integration](https://www.baeldung.com/spring-kafka#2-consuming-messages). 

So the message can be requested by another library, service mesh, or serverless runtime, but never forwarded to the application because of the bug, filter, etc 

I think the intent here can be described with something like: `Deliver` spans MUST be created for explicit requests to the messaging library and MUST NOT be created to trace pre-fetched or cached messages.

Author: Do you think this concern is rendered obsolete by having separate conventions/spans for push ("Deliver") and pull ("receive") scenarios?

not forwarded to the application, but pre-fetched or cached by messaging
libraries or SDKs. A single "Receive" span can account for a single message,
for multiple messages (in case messages are passed for processing as batches),
or for no message at all (in it is signalled that no messages were received).
For each message it accounts for, a "Receive" span SHOULD link to the "Create"

> span for the message.

Reviewer: The receive span works very well with batches, as it groups the entire messages batch under a single scope.
How do we imagine the trace for (very common) SDKs which expose an api for handling a single message each time?
Should there be a dummy "receive" span with exactly one message and no "process" spans?
Can we distinguish the "batch of one message" case from the "api for single message processing" case?

[Example from kafkajs](https://kafka.js.org/docs/consuming#a-name-each-message-a-eachmessage) - kafka client for nodejs:

### Single Message:
```js
await consumer.run({
    eachMessage: async ({ topic, partition, message }) => {
        console.log({
            key: message.key.toString(),
            value: message.value.toString(),
            headers: message.headers,
        })
    },
})
```

### Batch
```js
await consumer.run({
    eachBatchAutoResolve: true,
    eachBatch: async ({
        batch,
        resolveOffset,
        heartbeat,
        commitOffsetsIfNecessary,
        uncommittedOffsets,
        isRunning,
        isStale,
    }) => {
        for (let message of batch.messages) {
            console.log({
                topic: batch.topic,
                partition: batch.partition,
                highWatermark: batch.highWatermark,
                message: {
                    offset: message.offset,
                    key: message.key.toString(),
                    value: message.value.toString(),
                    headers: message.headers,
                }
            })

            resolveOffset(message.offset)
            await heartbeat()
        }
    },
})
```

Author: > How do we imagine the trace for (very common) SDKs which expose an api for handling a single message each time?
Should there be a dummy "receive" span with exactly one message and no "process" spans?

Good questions. Referencing the examples above, the current draft could be interpreted as follows:
* A "Receive" spans is created for each invocation of `eachBatch` or `eachMessage` callbacks. The duration is the duration of the callback invocation.
* It's the responsibility of the callback implementor to create "Process" spans. Those could either be children of the "Receive" span in the case of synchronous processing, or they could be links in the case of asynchronous processing.

> Can we distinguish the "batch of one message" case from the "api for single message processing" case?

If we want to be able to make this distinction, it is probably best to do this via attributes on "Receive" spans (e. g. `batch_size`).

Reviewer 4: But having an attribute like `batch_size` doesn't really answer if it is in fact a batch right? If we use the attribute, and the first example above it will be `batch_size=1`. Maybe we can suggest adding the attribute only when implementations are really batching?

Author: > Can we distinguish the "batch of one message" case from the "api for single message processing" case?

I think this is the main open question in this thread. I think it might be beneficial to handle this via attributes (and not span structure or span names). However, this will be a point to discuss in the workgroup meetings.

intermediaries when it is propagated from the producer to the consumer. It
cannot be assumed, and in many cases it is not even desired, that all those
components and layers are instrumented and propagate context according to
OpenTelemetry requirements.

A _creation context_ allows correlating the producer with the consumers of a
message, regardless of intermediary instrumentation. The creation context is
created by the producer and must be propagated to the consumers. It must not be
altered by intermediaries.  This context helps to model dependencies between
producers and consumers, regardless of the underlying messaging transport
mechanism and its instrumentation.

Instrumentors are required to instrument producer and consumer applications
so that context is attached to messages and extraced from messages in a
coordinated way. Future versions of these conventions might recommend [context propagation according to certain industry standards](#standards-for-context-propagation).

> A producer SHOULD attach a creation context to each message. The creation context
> SHOULD be attached in a way so that it is not changed by intermediaries.

### Trace structure, names, and attributes

> 

Author: For producer instrumentation, @blumamir identified several different possiblities.

1. Having a dedicated span and context for each single message, also for batched messages. There could be a single "Publish" span for a batch, but there needs to be a single "Message" span for each single message in the span. The context of the "Message" span will be passed on and used to link consumer traces.
2. Having one ("Publish") span per batch, and storing message specific information on this single span.
   a. Message specific information could be stored in events that are added to the span.
   b. Message specific information could be stored in an attribute (e. g. an attribute that consists of a list of message ids).
3. Having one "Publish" span for a batch, but having a dedicated span-less context for each message. This span-less context will be passed on with each message and will be used to link consumer traces.

processing callbacks, which can then be instrumented by the libraries or SDKs).

While it is possible to create "Process" spans and correlate those with
consumer traces in certain cases, this is not something that can be generally
required. Therefore, it is more feasible to require the creation of "Deliver"
spans (for push-based APIs) or "Receive" spans (for pull-based APIs) to
correlate producer with consumer traces.

##### Instrumenting push-based scenarios

In push-based consumer scenarios, the delivery of messages is not initiated by
the application code. Instead, callbacks or handlers are registered and then
called by messaging SDKs to forward messages to the application.

A "Deliver" span covers the call of such a callback or handler, and should link
to the "Create" spans of all messages that are forwarded via the respective
call. Depending on the use case, "Deliver" spans can correlate with "Process"
spans or other spans modelling processing operations.

> "Deliver" spans SHOULD be created for operations of passing messages to the
> application, when those operations are not initiated by the application
> code.

> ##### Instrumenting pull-based scenarios

Reviewer: my take on it is:
There are 2 different dimensions here: push-pull and callback-return patterns.

The push-pull is mainly about the ambient context and history. 

### push
the consume trace (in the consumer service) has no "history" (within the process) or ambient context. it is the first operation in that service and thus a bit simpler than pull scenario. It is the direct continuation of the operations that happened prior to it in the intermediator and can potentially be connected with parent-child relationship and derive sampling decisions.

### pull
The consumer trace usually starts with some sort of an RPC request from the service's business logic and can potentially have a history at the time messages are consumed. It can also be somehow reasonable to expect 2 different spans in this case - one describing the user's request (RPC operation invoked by user) and one describing the handling of those messages within the application's code.

---

The callback-return is about how messages are delivered back to the application and how the handling is scoped (active span + duration)

### callback
This pattern makes auto instrumentation easy as the handling of messages is well scoped in term of span activation and duration which are (somehow) well defined. callback pattern can be used in both push and pull mechanisims (for example, SQS in nodejs is pull based and has a callback mode).

### return
This is a complex scenario where the delivered messages handling is not semantically scoped by the program. To my knowledge and understanding, this can only happen with "pull" based systems.

Author: Good point.

I think for the vast majority of cases, the combinations are push-callback and pull-return.

The SQS case looks like pull-callback, but I think it can also be seen as a corner case of push-callback, in the sense that the application has no idea of when the supplied callback is called. In the SQS case, you might create a "Receive" span for the call to `receiveMessage`, and a "Deliver" span for the duration of the callback. However, the "Receive" span has most likely ended when the "Deliver" span starts. So, in this special case it makes maybe sense to start a new trace for the "Deliver" span (according to the push-callback model), and link it to the `receiveMessage` operation that triggered it?

Maybe we need some experimentation here. But as far as I understand, the SQS case can be modelled as a special case of the push-callback scenario.

creation of a distinct span for each message, which is not feasible in all
scenarios. In certain batching scenarios where many messages are created and
published in large batches, creating a span for every single message would
obfuscate traces and is not desirable. Thus having a unique and distinct
context per message is recommended, but not required.

For each producer scenario, a "Publish" span needs to be created. This span
measures the duration of the call or operation that provides messages for
sending or publishing to an intermediary. This call or operation (and the
related "Publish" span) can either refer to a single message or a batch of
multiple messages.

It is recommended to create a "Create" span for every single message. "Create"
spans can be created during the "Publish" operation as children of the
"Publish" span. Alternatively, "Create" spans can be created independently of
the "Publish" operation. In that case, SDKs may provide mechanisms to allow
attaching independent contexts with messages.

If a "Create" span exists for a message, its context must be attached to the
message. If no "Create" span exists for a message, the context of the related

> "Publish" span must be attached to the message.

Reviewer 5: Based on the [flow](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192/files#diff-a96f155dcb7d9ffc3712363edfab3d53d71b120724ca2cd968720c184a9ae0aaR69), this infers a preference of a "Create" context over a "Publish" context, even though "Publish" will often happen after "Create".

Is this is intentional?

If so, should the preference for "Create" context be explicitly called out?

At present it could be read as "Create" context being attached to message and then a subsequent "Publish" does the same, overwriting the "Create" context. As there doesn't appear to be anything stating what should be on the message when it reaches a Consumer in the case where the two contexts had been created on the Producer side.

Author: >  this infers a preference of a "Create" context over a "Publish" context, even though "Publish" will often happen after "Create".
>
> Is this is intentional?

Yes, the reason being that the "Create" context will always relate to a _single_ message, whereas a "Publish" context might relate to a batch of messages. If there's a context relating to a single message, it should be preferred.

> If so, should the preference for "Create" context be explicitly called out?

That's what we tried to do in this paragraph, if it's not clear enough we can improve on the wording:

> If a "Create" span exists for a message, its context must be attached to the message. If no "Create" span exists for a message, the context of the related "Publish" span must be attached to the message.

to notify the application that no message is available for processing), one
message, or multiple messages (a batch of messages). "Deliver" and "Receive"
spans should link to the "Create" span of the messages forwarded, thus those
spans can link to zero, one, or multiple "Create" spans.

> "Deliver" or "Receive" spans MUST NOT be created for messages which are not
> forwarded to the application, but are pre-fetched or cached by messaging
> libraries or SDKs.
>
> A single "Deliver" or "Receive" span can account for a single message, for
> multiple messages (in case messages are passed for processing as batches), or
> for no message at all (if it is signalled that no messages were received).  For
> each message it accounts for, the "Deliver" or "Receive" span SHOULD link to
> the "Create" span for the message.

##### Settlement

Messages can be settled in a variety of different ways. In some cases, messages
are not settled at all (fire-and-forget), in other cases settlement operations
are triggered manually by the user, in callback scenarios settlement can be
automatically triggered by messaging SDKs based on return values of callbacks.

> A "Settle" spans should be created for every settlement operation, no matter if

Reviewer: "Settle" spans **or events**

> the settlement operation was manually triggered by the user or automatically

Reviewer: For manual and auto settlement we have the span / event.
We also discussed creating semantics for the case of "no settlement". The user should be able to tell if the absence of settlement in a trace is due to a bug (forgetting to settle a message manually), or due to valid configuration decisions (configuring RabbitMQ channel with the `"noack": true` connection option).

Author: I think this should be modelled via attributes, and not via the span structure.

triggered by SDKs. SDKs will in some cases auto-settle messages in
push-scenarios, when messages are delivered via callbacks. In this case it is

> recommended to create a parent span, so that a "Settle" span will be a sibling

Reviewer: Do we want this suggested parent span to be specified anywhere? 
For example:
- What's the "messaging.operation" attribute should say?
- What other attributes should it collect to be useful?

Author: I think this parent span would qualify as an "ambient span", meaning that we make no further assumptions about it, except that is exists.

of the related "Deliver" span.

> In cases where it is not feasible to create spans for settlement operations, an

Reviewer: We discussed that it's a valid implementation decision to use settlement "events" instead of spans even when it is feasible to create spans.
The settlement spans can be very chatty in many cases, and they sometimes contain no duration or acknowledgment which makes them very suitable for a lightweight event on the "deliver" span.

Author: I re-formulated this.

event should be created instead. Events could be added to "Deliver" spans or to

> ambient spans.

Author: If I remember correctly, the idea here was to also allow settlement with events in scenarios with "Receive" spans. "Receive" spans end before settlement takes place, so if somebody wants to use events in this case, they need to be placed on some ambient span.

> "Settle" spans may link to "Create" spans of the messages that are settled,

Reviewer: And can also link to the "deliver" or "receive" spans. In the case of manual settlement, the settle and receive spans may not be on the same trace or easy to correlate in a general way. Link\s can solve this issue, giving full correlation across message handling phases.

Author: With what we've required for now, we can only rely on the creation context to be present for linking purposes, there is no clear mechanism yet of how to propagate context of "deliver" or "receive" spans to settlement operations that are in different traces.

This might be a valuable future addition, but I think it is out-of-scope for now.

however, for some settlement scenarios this is not feasible or possible.

> "Settle" spans or events SHOULD be created for every manually or automatically
> triggered settlement operation. A single "Settle" span can account for a
> single message or for multiple messages (in case messages are passed for
> settling as batches). For each message it accounts for, the "Settle" span

> > MAY link to the "Create" span for the message.

Reviewer: When we discussed the "deliver" span, we decided to use the links array as a container to specify **all** messages involved in the batch. This way we can:
- enumerate the participating messages in a consistent and stable manner
- have a silo to store "per message" attributes, like the id of the message being settled

I think we can benefit from using this pattern for settle as well, which will be identical semantics for the two similar operations.

Author: Are you talking about link attributes, or about an array of message ids in a single attribute? We didn't add this for deliver spans in this document. We could discuss this.

I tried to keep the requirements for "Settle" as close to "Deliver" as possible:

> "Deliver" or "Receive" spans MUST NOT be created for messages which are not forwarded to the application, but are pre-fetched or cached by messaging libraries or SDKs.
>
> A single "Deliver" or "Receive" span can account for a single message, for multiple messages (in case messages are passed for processing as batches), or for no message at all (if it is signalled that no messages were received).  For each message it accounts for, the "Deliver" or "Receive" span SHOULD link to the "Create" span for the message.

| `create`       | A message is created. |
| `receive`      | One or more messages are requested by a consumer. |
| `deliver`      | One or more message are passed to a consumer. |
| `settle`       | One or more message are settled. |

For further details about each of those operations refer, to the [section about trace structure](#trace-structure).

#### Span kind

[Span kinds](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind)
SHOULD be set according to the following table, based on the operation a span describes.

| Operation name | Span kind|
|----------------|-------------|
| `publish`      | `PRODUCER`, if no `create` spans are present. `INTERNAL` otherwise. |
| `create`       | `PRODUCER` |
| `receive`      | `CONSUMER` |
| `deliver`      | `CONSUMER` |
| `settle`       | `INTERNAL` |

Setting span kinds according to this table ensures, that span links between
consumer and producers always go from a `PRODUCER` span on the producer side to
a `CONSUMER` span on the consumer side. This allows analysis tools to interpret
linked traces without the need of additional semantic hints.

#### Attributes

> Attribute             | Type   | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Attribute             | Type   | Requirement Level
```

----------------------|--------|---------

> [`messaging.broker`](#messagingbroker) | string | Yes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.broker`](#messagingbroker) | string | Required
```

Reviewer 4: We aggreed in [this comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192#discussion_r888102877) to use `messaging.system`. I marked it as `Required` in: 8b4461a

> [`messaging.operation`](#messagingoperation) | string | Yes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.operation`](#messagingoperation) | string | Required
```

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | Required conditionally: for producer spans and if the broker supports multi-tenancy
```

Author: In my understanding the destination name will always be required, even if the broker doesn't support multi-tenancy (as `messaging.destination.name` will be the equivalent of what is currently put into `messaging.destination`).

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Author: Based on a discussion in the workgroup, this attribute should fully and uniquely specify the tenant and queue/topic.

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Author: We will come with a list of how `destination.name` might look for different messaging systems and brokers.

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Reviewer 2: To me it feels a bit arbitrary to include tenant but not broker in `destination.name`. The (broker, tenant, queue/topic) tuple uniquely defines a destination. If the goal is for `destination.name` specify a unique destination, then it should include all 3 components, not just tenant and queue/topic.

However, IMO it is actually better to split up individual pieces of information into different attributes to allow for more flexible searching in back ends. So, I think I'd prefer tenant to be split into its own attribute. I'm not sure if it's better off as an attribute of the destination or as a `messaging.tenant`. Perhaps we can discuss further next week?

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Author: For moving forward with this discussion, I looked at different messaging systems and what is needed to identify a destination for those. I then tried to map this information to the _messaging.destination_ and _messaging.url_ attributes in the current specification.

### Kafka
* Servers, e. g. `host1:port1,host2:port2` (_messaging.url_)
* Topic name (_messaging.destination_)

### JMS
* ConnectionFactory
* Destination, either aqueue or a topic name (_messaging.destination_)

### RabbitMQ
* Server (_messaging.url_)
* Exchange (_messaging.destination_)
* Routing key (_messaging.destination_)

### NATS
* Servers, e. g. `nats://server1:port1,nats://server2:port2` (_messaging.url_)
* Subject (_messaging.destination_)

### Pulsar
* Server, e. g. `pulsar://localhost:6650` (_messaging.url_)
* Topic (_messaging.destination_)

### RocketMQ
* Server, e. g. `localhost:9876` (_messaging.url_)
* Topic (_messaging.destination_)

### Amazon SQS
* Region
* Account number
* Queue name (_messaging.destination_)

All is embedded in a Queue URL (_messaging.url_): `https://sqs.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/123456789012/MyQueue`

### Amazon SNS
* Region
* Account number
* Topic name (_messaging.destination_)

All is embedded in a topic ARN (_messaging.url_?): `arn:aws:sns:us-east-2:123456789012:MyTopic`

### Amazon Kinesis
* Region
* Account number
* Stream name  (_messaging.destination_)

All is embedded in a stream ARN (_messaging.url_?): `arn:aws:kinesis:us-west-2:123456789012:stream/Foo`

### Azure Event Hubs
* Event Hub namespace
* Event Hub name (_messaging.destination_)

The namespace is embedded in a connection string (_messaging.url_): `Endpoint=sb://<NamespaceName>.servicebus.windows.net/;SharedAccessKeyName=<KeyName>;SharedAccessKey=<KeyValue>;EntityPath=<EventHubName>`

### Azure Service Bus
* Service bus namespace
* Service bus queue  (_messaging.destination_)

The namespace is embedded in a connection string (_messaging.url_): `Endpoint=sb://<NamespaceName>.servicebus.windows.net/;SharedAccessKeyName=<KeyName>;SharedAccessKey=<KeyValue>;EntityPath=<EventHubName>`

### Google Pub/Sub
* Project id
* Topic id (_messaging.destination_)

All is embedded in a resource name (_messaging.url_?): `projects/sampleproject/topics/sampletopic`

### AMQP
* Server address, e. g. `amqp://guest:guest@localhost:5672`  (_messaging.url_)
* Node name (_messaging.destination_)

### MQTT
* Server, e. g. `localhost:5555`  (_messaging.url_)
* Topic name (_messaging.destination_)

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Author: One proposed solution from the last workgroup meeting:

* `messaging.destination.name` as required attribute, capturing the topic, queue, subject, or node name, as previously.
* `messaging.destination.url` as an optional attribute, capturing the URL, or server name.

In addition to that, messaging systems can extend this with their own (possibly required) attributes. E. g., Azure Event Hubs could have `messaging.destination.name` and `messaging.destination.namespace` both required, Amazon solutions could require a combination of `messaging.destination.name`, `messaging.destination.account`, and `messaging.destination.region`.

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Reviewer 2: I agree with the general approach, but I have a couple of comments.

> In addition to that, messaging systems can extend this with their own (possibly required) attributes.
Do we want messaging systems to extend this to their liking, directly inside of `messaging.destination`? Or would it be better to suggest that these be scoped to `messaging.destination.<system>.<system-specific-attribute>`. This makes things a bit less confusing, I think, if different systems end up with the same attribute but with different format and/or semantics in the different systems.

> `messaging.destination.url` as an optional attribute, capturing the URL, or server name.
Since the `url` is optional, I don't see a problem per se. But one thing I'd like us to be aware of is that for consumers, the required grouping of attributes would be `messaging.source` and `messaging.destination` would be optional, as some messaging systems may provide some information related to the message's original destination and others may not. For systems that do have this information available, in many cases there would be much less information available for the original destination compared to what the producer of the message had. In some cases, only the destination name would be known, but not necessarily the URL and/or other information to uniquely identify the message's original destination. In the case of `url`, it might be different if the receiving broker was part of a network and forwarded the message to another broker before being sent to a consumer. These two brokers would have different URLs.

In cases where the consumer can provide partial information of the original destination, but not enough to uniquely identify the destination, is it better to provide the partial information as a clue, even if the destination can't be uniquely identified?

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Author: > In cases where the consumer can provide partial information of the original destination, but not enough to uniquely identify the destination, is it better to provide the partial information as a clue, even if the destination can't be uniquely identified?

I would say so. If we stick with having both `messaging.source` and `messaging.destination` (which we didn't finish discussing yet), for consumers all `messaging.destination.*` attributes would be optional, and I think we shouldn't require any combination to be present that lets one uniquely identify the source. This would complicate the specification without providing much benefit.

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Reviewer 4: @dpauls the formatting was a bit confusing, but I think this was your comment/question right?

>it be better to suggest that these be scoped to messaging.destination.<system>.<system-specific-attribute>. This makes things a bit less confusing, I think, if different systems end up with the same attribute but with different format and/or semantics in the different systems.

I think that's generally what @pyohannes meant when saying 

>In addition to that, messaging systems can extend this with their own (possibly required) attributes.

Just wanted to make sure we are all in the same page here :)

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Reviewer 4: We still didn't finish this topic, so just leaving this comment to make the status clear.

> [`messaging.destination.template`](#messagingdestinationtemplate) | string | No

Reviewer 3: having different names for destination and source could be confusing for users. E.g. I'm investigating connectivity  errors for a given broker+topic, I'd have to write something like `msg. destination.name == "foo" or msg.source.name == "foo"`.

It might be small, but I don't really understand why we need to use different terminology here. 

I suggest we try to find a name that can describe any sort of messaging destination (queues, topics, subjects). Would `entity` or  `channel` work?

> [`messaging.destination.kind`](#messagingdestinationkind) | string | No

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.destination.kind`](#messagingdestinationkind) | string | Recommended if broker supports different kinds
```

> [`messaging.destination.temporary`](#messagingdestinationtemporary) | string | No

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.destination.temporary`](#messagingdestinationtemporary) | string | Recommended if and only if is temporary
```

Reviewer 4: Yeah I think so. So maybe something like this to be more specific:

> Recommended to be added and set to `true` if and only if is temporary.

Reviewer 4: I changed the text to my suggestion above and made the type `boolean` instead of string in 964d65e

> [`messaging.destination.anonymous`](#messagingdestinationanonymous) | string | No

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.destination.anonymous`](#messagingdestinationanonymous) | string | Recommended if and only if is anonymous
```

Reviewer 4: Should we change these flags to `boolean`? Do we know if the semconv tooling supports this? Code generation and such..

Reviewer 4: There's already other attributes using types other than `string` so nothing new. I changed the wording and type to be similar to `destination.temporary` in 964d65e

> [`messaging.source.name`](#messagingsourcename) | string | For consumer spans

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`messaging.source.name`](#messagingsourcename) | string | Required conditionally: for producer spans and if the broker supports multi-tenancy
```

> [`messaging.source.template`](#messagingsourcetemplate) | string | No

Reviewer 3: I checked the terminology used by different systems on this and found that it's either `wildcard` (NATS, MQTT Clients) or `pattern` (kafka, pulsar). I suggest we stick to existing terminology.

Reviewer 4: +1 for `wildcard`.

Reviewer 2: I'll start off by saying I'm not thrilled with the term `template` myself. But I don't think that `wildcard` is a good choice either, since it is sort of the opposite of I think we should try to achieve with template. `pattern` sounds a bit better, but it is tightly coupled to the wildcard concept, which I hope to show below is not a good match for this attribute. Perhaps `schema` is a better term?

What I think we should be trying to achieve with `template` is to document high cardinality topic levels or fragments. Wildcards express that the consumer wants to receive all values of a topic level or fragment, but it doesn't explain what the topic level is. Why is this useful? I can think of two reasons:
1. It can help with someone viewing traces to either search for related messages (that use the same `template` or `schema`) or to better understand the semantic meaning of the topic in a trace.
2. If a topic has high cardinality topic levels, the topic itself is not suitable for use in a span name. If a `template` or `schema` is available, it would be low cardinality and perhaps we would decide it is useful in a span name. We still have to discuss span names, so I think further discussion of this point should be saved for when we get to the point of discussing span names as a group.

To illustrate these points, suppose you have a topic hierarchy that looks something like this:
`myCompany/vehicles/{vin}/position/{gps-latitude}/{gps-longitude}`

A message might be published with a topic of:
`myCompany/vehicles/4Y1SL65848Z411439/position/45.4236/75.7009`

To someone not familiar with the topic schema being used, this might be hard to decipher. Furthermore, such a field name is not suitable for use within a span name due to its high cardinality. Including the template or schema into the trace helps with both of these problems.

Where the concept of a wildcard fits into the example above is that an MQTT client for example may subscribe to messages like this with a subscription of `myCompany/vehicles/#` or `myCompany/vehicles/+/position/+/+`. In the context of the consumer, the template concept is still useful. The subscription `myCompany/vehicles/#` doesn't say much to someone looking at the trace. However, including the template or schema for the topic allows someone to see the information that the consumer can derive from the topic of the received messages.

For many messaging systems, this concept is not embedded within the messaging system itself, it is only an application layer concern. This means it would be impossible for many auto-instrumented SDK's to include this. However, might it be possible for an application to co-operate with auto-instrumentation and add this attribute to a span started by the SDK?

Regardless, as messaging is becoming more widespread in large organizations, there is an evolving need to maintain a registry of events so that they can be tracked and governance policies can be applied to them. Newer initiatives like AsyncAPI I believe facilitate this with the concept of [channel parameters](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v2.0.0#parameterObject). I believe auto-instrumentation added to an AsyncAPI implementation may be able to inject this information automatically.

To sum up, I think this concept is very useful to support. However, coming up with the right name is tricky. Let's discuss further during our next meeting.

Reviewer 6: Agree it's both a 1) important concept for messaging systems that support dynamic topics and 2) a difficult concept name properly.

Author: > I checked the terminology used by different systems on this and found that it's either wildcard (NATS, MQTT Clients) or pattern (kafka, pulsar). I suggest we stick to existing terminology.

Currently we know of four different messaging systems supporting this feature (thanks @lmolkova for checking), and there are four different terms for this feature: pattern, wildcard, template, and schema.

Another possible solution would be to make this a messaging system specific attribute. I think this would be justified, as the majority of system do not support it. Kafka would have an attribute `messaging.destination.pattern`, while NATS has `messaging.destination.wildcard`. For a Kafka user who is using a pattern the meaning will be immediately clear, whereas they might be confused by the term "wildcard", "template", or "schema".

[`messaging.source.kind`](#messagingsourcekind) | string | No
[`messaging.source.temporary`](#messagingsourcetemporary) | string | No
[`messaging.source.anonymous`](#messagingsourceanonymous) | string | No

> [`messaging.protocol.name`](#messagingprotocolname) | string | No

Reviewer 3: we should figure out the relationship with  `net.transport` attribute. Also, if we're not targeting transport-level instrumentation in v1, should we really add protocol information here? 
Ideally, when transport-level instrumentation is added, all the information will be there

> # Stabilizing messaging semantic conventions for tracing

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
# Overhauling messaging semantic conventions for tracing
```

> This document aims to describe the necessary changes for bringing the [existing semantic conventions for messaging](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/a1a8676a43dce6a4e447f65518aef8e98784306c/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md)
> from the current [experimental](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md#experimental)
> to a [stable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md#stable)
> state.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This document aims to overhaul the [existing semantic conventions for messaging](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/a1a8676a43dce6a4e447f65518aef8e98784306c/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md).
```

### Terminology

The terminology used in this document is based on the [CloudEvents specification](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/v1.0.1/spec.md).
CloudEvents is hosted by the CNCF and provides a specification for describing
event data in common formats to provide interoperability across services,
platforms and systems.

#### Message

A "message" is a transport envelope for the transfer of information. The
information is a combination of a payload and metadata. Metadata can be
directed at consumers or intermediaries on the message path. Messages are
transferred via one or more intermediaries.  Messages are uniquely
identifiable.

In the strict sense, a _message_ is a payload that is sent to a specific
destination, whereas an _event_ is a signal emitted by a component upon
reaching a given state. This document is agnostic of those differences and uses
the term "message" in a wider sense to cover both concepts.

#### Producer

The "producer" is a specific instance, process or device that creates and
publishes a message. "Publishing" is the process of sending a message or batch
to the intermediary.

#### Consumer

> A "consumer" receives the message and acts upon it. It uses the context and

Reviewer 4: Good point. I will address it.

> data to execute some logic, which might lead to the occurrence of new messages.

Reviewer 4: It's probably the "creation span context" that is used to link a producer with a consumer. But I think we can remove this from here, since it's just defining terminology and setting the stage. Also the `creation context` term is not defined yet.

> data to execute some logic, which might lead to the occurrence of new messages.

Reviewer 4: Addressed in: [5fa715d](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192/commits/5fa715dcc6a4e6adafce7fc4032d7f52c24fd31a)

The consumer receives, processes, and settles a message.

* "Receiving" is the process of obtaining a message from the intermediary.
* "Processing" is the process of acting on the information a message contains.
* "Settling" is the process where intermediary and consumer agree on the state

>   of the transfer.

Reviewer 4: That's a good point. Maybe it explicitly doesn't mention `producer` because this is inside the `Consumer` section? Maybe these three bullet points should be put "outside" so it applies for consumers, producers or intermediaries? WDYT?

>   of the transfer.

Reviewer 8: Yeah, agree. But other than being in the Consumer section I noticed that the "ack" phase from a Producer point of view wasn't taken into account at all, so I thought there was a specific reason for that ... but it doesn't seem to be the case.
We should add this concept and even updating the corresponding ASCIIDOC.

#### Intermediary

An "intermediary" receives a message for the purpose of forwarding it to the

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Reviewer 7: I wonder if a peer-to-peer messaging system falls outside the scope of these conventions. Existence of an intermediary seems to be a base assumption here.

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Reviewer 4: Yeah I wonder the same. I remember a similar discussion when the concept of [channels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Channel_(programming)#Go) was brought up and if these conventions should also model that. Could be a v2 topic maybe?

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Reviewer 8: Actually, AFAIU from this "proposal", the intermediary doesn't really play an active role from a tracing point of view, right?
I mean, there are no spans that the intermediary is going to add on the trace even because it's mentioned here that it won't touch anything about tracing coming through producer and consumer but just forwarding messages. At same time, you cannot have control on the intermediary in the sense that not all messaging systems would implement tracing by adding spans and so on (i.e. Kafka itself doesn't have such a support). The intermediary mentioned in this proposal seems to have a role "just" from a messaging point of view not interfering with tracing at all. Why then it cannot be considered optional? Where producer sends directly to a consumer, the consumer settle to the producer, ...
Maybe I am missing some obvious tracing aspect and I don't see?

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Author: This was discussed some time ago: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/173#discussion_r729120960

> I wonder if a peer-to-peer messaging system falls outside the scope of these conventions. Existence of an intermediary seems to be a base assumption here.

Yes. If the requirement for an intermediary is removed, there'd be a _wide_ range of use cases that might qualify as messaging. Those use cases should be supported, but I think they different enough to merit a different set of semantic conventions. 

> I mean ... with AMQP 1.0 protocol, the communication is really peer to peer so a producer could be connected directly to a consumer.

This is a case similar to [CloudEvents](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/cloudevents.md#overview). Both can be used for messaging use cases (with an intermediary) and for peer-to-peer communication (without intermediary).

I think distinguishing between messaging systems (requiring an intermediary) and peer-to-peer communication is crucial, as the presence of an intermediary and the asynchronous nature of communication between producer and consumer accounts for the special nature of messaging scenarios.

If the requirement for an intermediary is removed, it would be hard to argue why HTTP client/server communication wouldn't qualify as peer-to-peer messaging system.

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Reviewer 4: From a tracing stand point, the intermediary is not playing any role in a trace, you are right. This was a decision we took for a V1 where we would only focus on the "application layer" of the trace and not transport level. We have a project board, and you can see "intermediary instrumentation" is under "v2". https://github.com/orgs/open-telemetry/projects/20/views/1?filterQuery=v2

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Author: > My point was raised just because I don't see the intermediary being in the "tracing" picture but we are assuming it's needed but in the end not that much for tracing purposes but for reducing the scope of the specification, which could make sense.

It was decided to define intermediary instrumentation as [out-of-scope for v1.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/main/text/trace/0173-messaging-semantic-conventions.md#instrumenting-intermediaries) of the semantic conventions. The first stable version intends to only cover producer and consumer instrumentation.

However, it is intended to cover intermediary instrumentation with future iterations of the semantic conventions. We definitely have the goal of keeping intermediary instrumentation in mind and to not come up with any conventions that block possibilities for intermediary instrumentation.

Also see [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/main/text/trace/0205-messaging-semantic-conventions-context-propagation.md#transport-context-propagation).

> next receiver, which might be another intermediary or a consumer.

Reviewer 8: Thanks guys!

### Stages of producing and consuming messages

Producing and consuming a message involves five stages:

```
                               CONSUMER

                   . . . . . . Settle
PRODUCER           .              ^
                   .              |
Create             .           Process
  |                v              ^
  v        +--------------+       |
Publish -> | INTERMEDIARY | -> Receive
           +--------------+

> ```

Reviewer 9: yes, I think it's missing. A Previous comment from @ppatierno also mentions that

1. The producer creates a message.
2. The producer publishes the message to an intermediary.
3. The consumer receives the message from an intermediary.
4. The consumer processes the message.
5. The consumer settles the message by notifying the intermediary that the
   message was processed. In some cases (fire-and-forget), the settlement stage

>    does not exist.

Reviewer 4: Would you say removing this (fire-and-forget) makes sense then? I can only speculate, but I think the intention was to say that some consumers may chose not to do it, thus being more of a "receive and forget"? I guess @pyohannes would be the ultimate to know the intention for this.

>    does not exist.

Reviewer 8: I am not sure that "receive and forget" makes sense as well.
In a traditional messaging system, if a consumer gets the message and then doesn't settle it (so it "forgets"), the message will be still available to other consumers at some point after a timeout so it will drive to a duplicate processing of the same message which would be caused not by a network problem (settlement lost for example) but by the consumer intention to "forget". I would say that in general it doesn't make sense, the consumer should settle to allow the system to remove the message from the queue at some point.
In Kafka instead things are different, because the messaging system doesn't have to remove the message from the "topic partition", it will be there for the configured retention period. The difference is in the client which tracks (and commits) the offset of the messages it already read to continue from there (having anyway the way to re-read older messages).

>    does not exist.

Author: MQTT offers a QoS level 0, which is [defined as follows](https://www.hivemq.com/blog/mqtt-essentials-part-6-mqtt-quality-of-service-levels/):
> The minimal QoS level is zero. This service level guarantees a best-effort delivery. There is no guarantee of delivery. The recipient does not acknowledge receipt of the message and the message is not stored and re-transmitted by the sender. QoS level 0 is often called “fire and forget” and provides the same guarantee as the underlying TCP protocol.

Something similar exists for [AMQP](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-mq/9.1?topic=applications-message-delivery-reliability-amqp#q123795___qos).

There is the concept of _at most once delivery_, which is possible with several messaging systems and which some people wanted to have covered by these conventions.

>    does not exist.

Reviewer 8: Yeah you are right, I forgot that in MQTT for example the consumer can subscribe with a QoS different from the one used by the publisher. Of course, AMQP offers the same with settlement.
Anyway I have never heard talking about "fire and forget" or "receive and forget" so I would avoid using them.
The best way to me sounds to be using:

* AT MOST ONCE, which is a QoS 0, (or "receive and forget")
* AT LEAST ONCE, which is a QoS 1
* EXACTLY ONCE, which is a QoS 2

### Context propagation

A message may pass many different components and layers in one or more
intermediaries when it is propagated from the producer to the consumer. It
cannot be assumed, and in many cases it is not even desired, that all those
components and layers are instrumented and propagate context according to
OpenTelemetry requirements.

A _creation context_ allows correlating the producer with the consumers of a
message, regardless of intermediary instrumentation. The creation context is
created by the producer and must be propagated to the consumers. It must not be
altered by intermediaries.  This context helps to model dependencies between
producers and consumers, regardless of the underlying messaging transport
mechanism and its instrumentation.

Instrumentors are required to instrument producer and consumer applications
so that context is attached to messages and extracted from messages in a
coordinated way. Future versions of these conventions might recommend [context propagation according to certain industry standards](#standards-for-context-propagation).

> A producer SHOULD attach a creation context to each message. The creation context

> > SHOULD be attached in a way so that it is not possible to be changed by intermediaries.

Reviewer 2: As stated, the creation context is intended to allow correlation of a message's producer with its consumers. One of the criticisms of the concept of the creation span was that it is essentially a zero-duration span, that isn't really measuring anything. The counter to that criticism was that producer-consumer correlation is important and such a context is important for creating these links.

This makes me wonder why a message's send span couldn't serve this purpose? I believe the main concern with this was that a send span may represent a batch of messages. It should be possible to precisely correlate back to a unique context for a single message.

During yesterday's discussion, we were further puzzling over batch send spans and how to express per-message attributes such as message_id, correlation_id, and destination.name. A number of possibilities were discussed, but a couple that I'll highlight were:
1. Do not include per-message attributes in the send span directly. Instead, for each message, create a link to its creation context. Inside the link, include per-message attributes.
2. Create a span for each message in the batch as a child of the batch send. For some messaging systems, this may be a zero-duration span again. However, for other systems I believe a batch send may simply be a convenience function that loops over sending individual messages. In these cases the spans could measure sending the individual messages. Perhaps they are acknowledged as a batch and therefore they would all end at the same time. But you could measure from when you started the send of that message until the batch was acked.

I believe we generally agreed option 2 was the nicest option. The concern was the cost of extra spans and the general dislike for zero-duration spans. However, what if this span also served as the creation context? This gets rid of a span that is almost certainly zero-duration with a span that:
* Measures an actual send operation for single message sends
* May measure an actual send operation for a single message in a batch; or
* May be a zero-duration span for other messages. In these cases wouldn't it also be an option to have the span duration cover the batch send? I'm not sure it adds a lot of value, but I also don't see a problem with this approach.

I think if we took this approach, it completely gets rid of all zero-duration spans for single message sends. It may get rid of zero duration spans for batch sends. I think in all cases the total number of spans is the same or less than we would have had otherwise, and the overal span structure modeling makes a lot more sense to me.

If we did this, I think it makes sense for the "batch send" span (which is the parent of all individual message send spans) be defined as it's own operation, and with its own set of attributes. It would likely be lighter weight as it would only include attributes common for all messages in the send. I think this span structure would be easier for back ends to implement against.

Is there anything I'm missing as to why a send span couldn't serve as the context used for producer-consumer correlation?

Does anyone have any feedback on this idea?

Reviewer 4: @dpauls thanks for putting the summary here!

> However, for other systems I believe a batch send may simply be a convenience function that loops over sending individual messages.

This is interesting. In this case the span/context in each message is actually something that can be used to track time. Do you happen to know maybe a system/SDK that does this?

> I believe we generally agreed option 2 was the nicest option. The concern was the cost of extra spans and the general dislike for zero-duration spans. However, what if this span also served as the creation context? This gets rid of a span that is almost certainly zero-duration with a span that:

As we discussed, my understanding is that a creation context _is_ a span, created for each message as part of a batch send operation (thus being children of the "send" span). It's also what the Johannes wrote in this OTEP here: https://github.com/pyohannes/oteps/blob/72e1215d698ad86473f874ef0f0282de07c66521/text/trace/0192-messaging-semantic-conventions-spec.md?plain=1#L152

What I'm a bit confused now is this part: https://github.com/pyohannes/oteps/blob/72e1215d698ad86473f874ef0f0282de07c66521/text/trace/0192-messaging-semantic-conventions-spec.md?plain=1#L162

> If a "Create" span exists for a message, its context SHOULD be attached to
> the message. If no "Create" span exists, the context of the related "Publish"
> span SHOULD be attached to the message.

I interpret this as:

- Single message: The `Publish` span is attached to the message, essentially being copied to it. This makes sense, as it's not necessary to have an extra create span for this case. We can attach message-specific attributes here.

- Batch: If the messages don't have the create context, then the `Publish` span context should be attached to the messages in the batch. Then here we run into the message-specific attributes problem.

Reviewer 7: I want to mention that a create-span is not necessarily zero-duration. I think there is an argument for changing the concept of creation to make the stages more symmetrical so that just how "publish" corresponds to "receive" or "deliver", "create" should correspond to "process". Meaning, "create" should track the logical, application-level business logic of creating the message (data). The following would then happen in order:

1. (n times) create some logical message, store creation context in there
2. publish one of these previously created messages, or a whole batch. Notice that this will typically not be a child of the create span, but might even be on a separate trace. If a creation context is not already on the message, you would still have to proceed as currently discussed, but if there is, no artificial spans have to be created.
3. ... from here one as before ...

Just like for a "process" span, a natural "create" span will usually require some cooperation by the application developer and in many cases cannot be automatically created.

Reviewer 3: I guess we all on the same page that having unqiue context per message is the best approach here. And setting atrificial duration on such spans would be a way to hide logical nature of this span - in most cases it does not track any work or operation except message creation. The only scenario where it'd provide value is when messages are sent separately by the client SDK and it seems like an edge case.

I suggest we don't try to hide this fact - we're lacking OTel concept such as unique context without a span or span without duration or event with unique context and we should discuss it with the broader  OTel spec community before making any decisions here.

Reviewer 3: Summarized different options here https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OrHsepd6GjzXKll1ggZyx1jBQd0d_t8NZXT1ZOem7D0/edit?usp=sharing - let's see if we can discuss it tomorrow on the call.

Reviewer 4: >  Meaning, "create" should track the logical, application-level business logic of creating the message (data)

@Oberon00 's take is indeed interesting,  I think we never thought this way. It highly depends on how the application works but I can imagine something like this:

- App receives a request to schedule a birthday notification to a user
- App needs to find the user birth date to be able to create the message `Start create context here`
- App fetchs the necessary data
- App creates the message, with the user data + adds the ambient/current create span to it
- App passes the message on to be send
- Scheduler service receives the message and process it

This indeed is not a 0 duration span, but of course highly depends on application owners to create such spans. In other cases, creating a message might be really just `var myMessage = new Message(data)` so it's really a `0` duration.

Reviewer 7: The question is then if creation of `data` is already (part of) the logical message creation.

Reviewer 3: > The question is then if creation of data is already (part of) the logical message creation.

this is very app-specific. Should message span be the span in which data was read? or created? Both seem to be controversial.

Auto-instrumentations can only control what happens within SDK API and at least my hopes of manual instrumentation precisely following conventions are low.

Reviewer 9: From my understanding, we are going to push for a message span that goes from producer send to consumer receive. Right?

### Trace structure

#### Producer

Producers are responsible for attaching a creation context to a message.
Subsequent consumers will use this context to link consumer traces to producer
traces. Ideally, each message gets a unique and distinct creation context
assigned. However, as a context must refer to a span this would require the
creation of a distinct span for each message, which is not feasible in all
scenarios. In certain batching scenarios where many messages are created and
published in large batches, creating a span for every single message would
obfuscate traces and is not desirable. Thus having a unique and distinct
context per message is recommended, but not required.

For each producer scenario, a "Publish" span needs to be created. This span
measures the duration of the call or operation that provides messages for

> sending or publishing to an intermediary. This call or operation (and the

Reviewer 4: My interpretation is that it's "vague" intentionally. In my view it can mean/cover all of the scenarios you brought. The problem is that it can't enforce anything and since it changes between systems + what instrumentations can do I'm not sure if we should be highly specific here.

> sending or publishing to an intermediary. This call or operation (and the

Reviewer 8: I made a suggestion to list the scenarios.

> For each producer scenario, a "Publish" span needs to be created. This span
> measures the duration of the call or operation that provides messages for
> sending or publishing to an intermediary. This call or operation (and the
> related "Publish" span) can either refer to a single message or a batch of
> multiple messages.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
For each producer scenario, a "Publish" span needs to be created. This span measures the time for publishing the message which, depending on the messaging system and the producer API, could include:

* just storing the message in an internal producer buffer, and asynchronously sent to the intermediary
* actual synchronous sending to the intermediary
* one of the above but also getting an acknowledgement/settlement back from the intermediary

This call or operation (and the related "Publish" span) can either refer to a single message or a batch of multiple messages.
```

For further details about each of those operations refer, to the [section about trace structure](#trace-structure).

#### Span kind

[Span kinds](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#spankind)
SHOULD be set according to the following table, based on the operation a span describes.

| Operation name | Span kind|
|----------------|-------------|
| `publish`      | `PRODUCER`, if no `create` spans are present. `INTERNAL` otherwise. |
| `create`       | `PRODUCER` |
| `receive`      | `CONSUMER` |
| `deliver`      | `CONSUMER` |
| `settle`       | `INTERNAL` |

Setting span kinds according to this table ensures, that span links between
consumer and producers always go from a `PRODUCER` span on the producer side to
a `CONSUMER` span on the consumer side. This allows analysis tools to interpret
linked traces without the need of additional semantic hints.

#### Attributes

Attribute             | Type   | Requirement Level
----------------------|--------|---------
[`messaging.system`](#messagingsystem) | string | Yes
[`messaging.operation`](#messagingoperation) | string | Required

> [`messaging.destination.name`](#messagingdestinationname) | string | For producer spans

Reviewer 3: Done some research on `messaging.destination.name`:
- [kafka](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/39093488/can-single-kafka-producer-produce-messages-to-multiple-topics-and-how), [rocketmq](https://rocketmq.apache.org/docs/batch-example/) can publish a batch where different messages are sent to different topics. The only way out of it I see is through link per message with attributes. 
- Azure EventGrid either does not have a destination name at all and is fully identified by host or has topic-name per message and not per *send* call, i.e. same issue as above

Also, [Pulsar](https://github.com/streamnative/examples/blob/master/clients/pubsub/examples/delayed-message.md) that have tenant/namespace/topic structure, does not really care about it on the client API level. E.g, `public/dlt-example/dlt-example-topic` is passed as a string to the producer. I believe the whole thing should go to the `messaging.destination.name`

With this in mind, `messaging.destination.name` should be a conditionally required attribute (when available and when all messages in a batch are published to the same topic). 
And the contract is that it uniquely identifies topic/queue/subject/entity within either
- `net.peer.name:net.peer.port` (not available for GCP, AWS or vanilla JMS) or
- `cloud.account.id` + `cloud.region` for AWS - check out [AWS lambda otel samples](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/instrumentation/aws-lambda.md)
- `cloud.account.id` for GCP

It's probably hard to build UI with so few quarantees.

Reviewer 7: For cloud messaging systems, I think we should go for the cloud-native resource ID, like the full ARN in AWS (see faas.id spec in current specification, it has some general wording that could be extracted / reused here).

Reviewer 4: I wanted to see if we can take a step back with this. I was thinking about it and wanted to see your opinions on: 

- This varies a lot between different systems
- But it still seem like there is _always_ something that can be added here that uniquely identifies the destination

Given those facts, couldn't leave this still as `Required`? We then give _some_ hints on what instrumentation should usually put in here, but ultimately it's on them to know exactly how this should be composed. 

I feel we are running into circles with this attribute. Maybe we should make it more flexible and allow each individual messaging system SDK/Instrumentation do what's best for them. WDYT?

Reviewer 7: This definitely needs a per-system definition, much like faas.id, db.name, etc.. But I don't think each instrumentation should decide on their own, at least not when it is likely that there will be different instrumentations for the same messaging system.

[`messaging.destination.template`](#messagingdestinationtemplate) | string | No
[`messaging.destination.kind`](#messagingdestinationkind) | string | No
[`messaging.destination.temporary`](#messagingdestinationtemporary) | string | No
[`messaging.destination.anonymous`](#messagingdestinationanonymous) | string | No

> [`messaging.source.name`](#messagingsourcename) | string | For consumer spans

Reviewer 7: I think the OTEP text should document why the decision was made to split the "destination" attributes were split into "destination" and "source" (and maybe reconsider).

[`messaging.source.template`](#messagingsourcetemplate) | string | No
[`messaging.source.kind`](#messagingsourcekind) | string | No
[`messaging.source.temporary`](#messagingsourcetemporary) | string | No
[`messaging.source.anonymous`](#messagingsourceanonymous) | string | No
[`net.app.protocol.name`](#netappprotocolname) | string | No
[`net.app.protocol.version`](#netappprotocolversion) | string | No
[`net.peer.ip`](#netpeerip) | string | No

> [`net.peer.name`](#netpeername) | string | No

Reviewer 7: I want to suggest a new "concept" here, which is that of the "receipt handle". In AWS SQS, when you call the [ReceiveMesssage API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSSimpleQueueService/latest/APIReference/API_ReceiveMessage.html), you get, along with the message ID (which is also missing as an attribute here), a unique "Receipt handle" for each message. The receipt handle is what you need to provide to [DeleteMessage](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSSimpleQueueService/latest/APIReference/API_DeleteMessage.html) or [DeleteMessageBatch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSSimpleQueueService/latest/APIReference/API_DeleteMessageBatch.html) to settle the message (instead of, e.g., the message ID).

The receipt handle is a rather but not terribly long base64 string. I wonder if:
* Other messaging systems have a similar mechanism (if not, all the other questions are irrelevant at this point)
* This concept should be described in the "individual message settlement" section 
* It would make sense defining an attribute for it, e.g. to correlate with logs. It is possible that this only makes sense in a future step together with intermediary instrumentation. But it could be interesting to track whether a message is re-processed without being re-delivered/received. Maybe too much of an edge case 🙂

Reviewer 8: Tbh I have never used AWS SQS and don't know any other messaging system having this concept, can you mention another one please?

Reviewer 7: I don't know one, that's why I'm asking.

Reviewer 8: I read that wrong ;-) Now it let me think that something like that should be in the Service Bus as well but in general in AMQP 1.0.
Let's take a look at the REST interface for Service Bus via HTTP. Other than a receive and delete message, there is a two-steps way: peek lock and delete. During the [Peek Lock](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/rest/api/servicebus/peek-lock-message-non-destructive-read) the consumer gets the message and a `sequencenumber` with it. This will be used in the next [Delete Message](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/rest/api/servicebus/delete-message) together with the message id to delete the message.
But even from an AMQP 1.0 point of view it makes sense because looking at the [specification](http://docs.oasis-open.org/amqp/core/v1.0/os/amqp-core-complete-v1.0-os.pdf), the `disposition` frame (which is the ack from the consumer) defines a `delivery-id`. This maps with the Azure Service Bus AMQP 1.0 implementation [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/service-bus-messaging/service-bus-amqp-request-response) where you can search for the sequence-number again for deleting a message. I guess that the `sequence number` maps to the `delivery-id` at AMQP 1.0 level.
Said that, I would agree that maybe a concept like a receipt handle, sequence number or delivery id could make sense to add for the "settlement" by the consumer.

example would be a destination name involving a user name or product id.
Although the destination name in this case is of high cardinality, the
underlying template is of low cardinality and can be effectively used for
grouping and searching spans.

This attribute is optional, but recommended if the destination name is created
based on such a template.

##### `messaging.destination.kind`

Different brokers have different concepts of message destinations, the most
popular being queues and topics. One of the most important differences in
destination kinds is how messages are settled: messages are settled
individually in queues, whereas messages are settled based on checkpoints in
topics. Individual brokers might specify additional destination kinds.

##### `messaging.destination.temporary`

If set to `true`, this flag denotes that the destination is a temporary
destination and might not exist anymore after messages are processed.

##### `messaging.destination.anonymous`

If set to `true`, this flag denotes that the destination is an anonymous
destination. Anonymous destinations are usually established just for a

> particular set of producers and consumer. Often such destinations are unnamed
> or have an auto-generated name.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
particular set of producers and consumer. Often such destinations are also anonymous.
```

> or have an auto-generated name.

Reviewer 7: Why "often"? Isn't that the definition of it being anonymous?

Reviewer 8: I would agree but in the end it's never unnamed but always auto-generated (it's needed to be addressed). This is the reason why, for example, AMQP 1.0 protocol define it as "dynamic" not "anonymous".

Reviewer 7: It already says "unnamed or have an auto-generated name". So why is that only "often"? If it is named and the name is not auto-generated, can it still be anonymous?

Reviewer 8: Tbh I don't know what it's referring to as "unnamed" destination. Right now "anonymous" sounds to be wrong, unless someone else can raise an example of why it's right.

##### `messaging.source.name`

The source name defines name of the source of a message, as it is

> specified by the consumer. There are different kinds of targets, varying

Reviewer 4: I will address it. But, also feel free to use the "suggestion" feature to propose changes :)

> specified by the consumer. There are different kinds of targets, varying

Reviewer 8: Next time I will do. Just to "understand" what's the preferred way in this community. Thanks!

> specified by the consumer. There are different kinds of targets, varying

Reviewer 4: No worries, just feel free to collaborate. It's a live document ✨

> specified by the consumer. There are different kinds of targets, varying

Reviewer 4: Addressed in: [5fa715d](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192/commits/5fa715dcc6a4e6adafce7fc4032d7f52c24fd31a)

> specified by the consumer. There are different kinds of targets, varying

Reviewer 4: @ppatierno not sure if you can resolve comments, but if you can, please mark these I pointed the commit as resolved, so it's easier for us to track what's pending to discuss. Thanks!

between different message brokers, e. g. queues in RabbitMQ, or topics in
Kafka.

This attributes is required for consumer spans modelling `deliver`, `receive`,
or `settle` operations. The name of the source a message is received from can
be different from the name of the destination a message was sent to.

##### `messaging.source.template`

See [`messaging.destination.template`](#messagingdestinationtemplate).

##### `messaging.source.kind`

See [`messaging.destination.kind`](#messagingdestinationkind).

##### `messaging.source.temporary`

See [`messaging.destination.temporary`](#messagingdestinationtemporary).

##### `messaging.source.anonymous`

See [`messaging.destination.anonymous`](#messagingdestinationanonymous).

##### `net.app.protocol.name`

The name of the underlying protocol which is used to publish and receive
messages. This should specify application layer protocols (e. g. AMQP, MQTT, or

> HTTP) and not transport or network layer protocols (e. g. TCP, UDP, IP).

Reviewer 4: See below https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192#discussion_r929893987

> HTTP) and not transport or network layer protocols (e. g. TCP, UDP, IP).

Reviewer 8: Tbh I followed the PR but I still see the `net.app.protocol.name` and version ... even if comment #192 says ....

> "net." is not not the network-layer stuff anymore

I do still think that the usage we are doing of this field with AMQP, MQTT, .. values is something related to the messaging so still using `messaging.` prefix makes more sense than `net.`
What am I missing?

> HTTP) and not transport or network layer protocols (e. g. TCP, UDP, IP).

Reviewer 3: @ppatierno [`net.*` are generic attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md) used by all hotel specs: HTTP, database, and messaging. 
Reusing attributes across specs makes it simpler for users to learn it once and write queries across different systems.

You can do messaging over HTTP/gRPC (some messaging systems in Azure, AWS, and GCP do it), so use Redis or DB feeds like messaging, so having messaging-specific protocols only will not work for all cases, and duplicating general protocols in messaging spec is not a great solution.

> HTTP) and not transport or network layer protocols (e. g. TCP, UDP, IP).

Reviewer 8: @lmolkova so the comment I read "net." is not not the network-layer stuff anymore" is not really true, because on your link I see "Network transport attributes" table. In this case I can understand that we want to share attributes across systems so `net.app.protocol.*` it's related to the application layer protocol and it makes sense.

> HTTP) and not transport or network layer protocols (e. g. TCP, UDP, IP).

Reviewer 7: (Kinda OT:)
@ppatierno
> so the comment I read "net. is not not the network-layer stuff anymore" is not really true

I meant network layer, as opposed to application layer. Of course it is still networking-related, but not necessarily the TCP/UDP-level layer of the networking stack.

See [Network Transport Attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md#network-transport-attributes)
for further details.

> ##### `net.app.protocol.version`

Reviewer 4: See below: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192#discussion_r929893987

The version of the protocol given in [`messagingprotocolname`](#messagingprotocolname),
if applicable.

See [Network Transport Attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md#network-transport-attributes)
for further details.

##### `net.peer.ip`

This should be the remote address (dotted decimal for IPv4 or [RFC5952](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5952)
of the broker or intermediary this specific message is sent to or received
from.

See [Network Transport Attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md#network-transport-attributes)
for further details.

##### `net.peer.name`

This should be the host name of the broker or intermediary this specific
message is sent to or received from.

See [Network Transport Attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md#network-transport-attributes)

> for further details.

Reviewer 7: Note that "net." is not not the network-layer stuff anymore. See merged PR https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2614

> for further details.

Reviewer 4: Yes. This change was discussed a bit and if you want, you can watch the recording about it here https://youtu.be/gOYmTTJTjLs?t=708

### System-specific extensions

### Examples

#### Single message producer, single message push-based consumer

```
  PRODUCER                                   CONSUMER

  +------------+         (link)              +------------+
  | Publish m1 | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Deliver m1 |
  +------------+                             +------------+
```

#### Single message producer, single message push-based consumer with manual settlement

```
  PRODUCER                                   CONSUMER

  +------------+                             +------------------+
  | Publish m1 | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Deliver m1       |
  +------------+                             +-----+-----------++
                                                   | Settle m1 |
                                                   +-----------+
```

#### Single message producer, single message push-based consumer with auto-settlement

```
  PRODUCER                                   CONSUMER

                                           +--------------------------+
                                           | Ambient                  |

>   +------------+                           +-+------------+-----------+

Reviewer 4: "Ambient" means the span that's active at the time of `Deliver m1`. For ex when an HTTP request arrives at a server, it may start a span before reaching the user's handler code. In this case, the user code has a "ambient" context already.

>   +------------+                           +-+------------+-----------+

Reviewer 8: > "Ambient" means the span that's active at the time of Deliver m1. For ex when an HTTP request arrives at a server, it may start a span before reaching the user's handler code. In this case, the user code has a "ambient" context already.

Ok thanks! It makes sense now

> About the auto-settlement I believe the ambient here has no connection, it's just to highlight a use case.

Maybe instead of having it in the title, we should have a simple description explaining the use case. This could be valid for all the others examples.

                +-----------+                     +------------+
```

#### Batch message producer, single message push-based consumer

```
  PRODUCER                                CONSUMER

  +---------+                             +------------+
  | Publish | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Deliver m1 |
  +---------+                             +------------+
        .                                 +------------+
        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Deliver m2 |
                                          +------------+
```

#### Batch message producer with independent "Create" spans, single message pull-based consumer

```
  PRODUCER                                      CONSUMER

  +-----------------------------------+
  | Ambient                           |
  +-+-----------+---------------------+         +------------+
    | Create m1 | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Receive m1 |
    +-----------+-----------+                   +------------+
                | Create m2 | . . . . . . . .
                +-----------+---------+     .   +------------+
                            | Publish |     . . | Receive m2 |

>                             +---------+         +------------+

Reviewer 8: Why "Publish" span is now a child of the last "Create" span here?

Reviewer 4: It shows the case where messages arrive at 'Publish' with the context already inside the messages. That's what the `with independent "Create" spans" means. 

The example a bit above "Batch message producer with "Create" spans, single message pull-based consumer" shows the opposite, where the messages arrive at 'Publish' without a context and 'Publish' adds it.

Reviewer 4: This is to highlight the use-case where messages arrive at "Publish" with the create context already populated in them. That's what the title tries to convey: "..  with independent "Create" spans". Maybe it should say something like:

"Batch message producer with "Create" spans populated before publish, single message pull-based consumer"

Reviewer 8: Yeah I agree, it makes much more sense and clear than saying "independent Create spans" imho.

Reviewer 4: Lol, sorry I had commented it before and lost my tab and forgot. Fridays.. 😅

Reviewer 4: Addressed in: [5fa715d](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/192/commits/5fa715dcc6a4e6adafce7fc4032d7f52c24fd31a)

conventions. The conventions comprise areas such as context propagation, trace
structure, names, and attributes.

After this OTEP is merged, the changes it proposes will be merged into the
messaging semantic conventions, which will subsequently be declared
[stable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md#stable).

## Proposed stable messaging semantic conventions for tracing

### Terminology

The terminology used in this document is based on the [CloudEvents specification](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/v1.0.1/spec.md).
CloudEvents is hosted by the CNCF and provides a specification for describing
event data in common formats to provide interoperability across services,
platforms and systems.

#### Message

A "message" is a transport envelope for the transfer of information. The
information is a combination of a payload and metadata. Metadata can be
directed at consumers or intermediaries on the message path. Messages are
transferred via one or more intermediaries.  Messages are uniquely
identifiable.

In the strict sense, a _message_ is a payload that is sent to a specific

> destination, whereas an _event_ is a signal emitted by a component upon

Reviewer 7: I think with a topic, the destination is the topic. That's how the current ("old") messaging semantic conventions have it defined: The destination of a message is a queue or a topic.

> destination, whereas an _event_ is a signal emitted by a component upon

Reviewer 9: sounds good to me @Oberon00

Publish -> | INTERMEDIARY | -> Receive
           +--------------+
```

1. The producer creates a message.
2. The producer publishes the message to an intermediary.
3. The consumer receives the message from an intermediary.
4. The consumer processes the message.
5. The consumer settles the message by notifying the intermediary that the
   message was processed. In some cases (fire-and-forget), the settlement stage
   does not exist.

The semantic conventions described below define how to model those stages in
traces, how to propagate context, and how to enrich traces with attributes.

### Context propagation

A message may pass many different components and layers in one or more
intermediaries when it is propagated from the producer to the consumer. It
cannot be assumed, and in many cases it is not even desired, that all those
components and layers are instrumented and propagate context according to
OpenTelemetry requirements.

A _creation context_ allows correlating the producer with the consumers of a
message, regardless of intermediary instrumentation. The creation context is
created by the producer and must be propagated to the consumers. It must not be

> altered by intermediaries.  This context helps to model dependencies between

Reviewer 4: We have this part sorted out in the other PR https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2750#discussion_r978603683

                +-----------+                     +------------+
```

#### Batch message producer, single message push-based consumer

```
  PRODUCER                                CONSUMER

  +---------+                             +------------+
  | Publish | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Deliver m1 |
  +---------+                             +------------+
        .                                 +------------+
        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Deliver m2 |
                                          +------------+
```

#### Batch message producer with "Create" spans populated before publish, single message pull-based consumer

```
  PRODUCER                                      CONSUMER

  +-----------------------------------+
  | Ambient                           |
  +-+-----------+---------------------+         +------------+
    | Create m1 | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . | Receive m1 |
    +-----------+-----------+                   +------------+
                | Create m2 | . . . . . . . .
                +-----------+---------+     .   +------------+
                            | Publish |     . . | Receive m2 |

>                             +---------+         +------------+

Reviewer 2: We don't seem to be consistent within pull-based consumer scenarios in what the parent context should be for a receive span. I believe the intent is that the parent should be the application's ambient span?

Although intermediary instrumentation is out of scope, it's something I'm thinking about and there is a decision to make as to how the transport context of the message fits into these traces. If you care about the path the message takes, it's nice to have the receive span as a child of the message's context. But since it is the application's "pull" that caused the span, it's probably more correct for the receive span to be a child of the application's ambient span.

If we agree this is the right approach, it probably makes the most sense for the receive span to link to the message's transport context (although no need to mention here as that would be out of scope). If there is no ambient context, it seems as though it would be nicer to be a child rather than create a brand new trace with no parent at all. On the one hand, this means we have inconsistent structure. On the other hand, does splitting the traces up help with anything?

  +------------+                          +------------+------------+
                                                       | Process m2 |
                                                       +------------+
```

#### Single message producers, batch pull-based consumer with manual settlement

```
  PRODUCER                    CONSUMER

  +------------+
  | Publish m1 |. . . .       +----------------------------------------+
  +------------+      .       | Ambient                                |
                      .       +-+---------+----------------------------+
                      . . . . . | Receive |
  +------------+          .     +---------+    +-----------+
  | Publish m2 |. . . . . .                    | Settle m1 |
  +------------+                               +-----------+-----------+
                                                           | Settle m2 |
                                                           +-----------+
```

## Future possibilities

### Transport context propagation

One possibility to seamlessly integrate producer/consumer and intermediary
instrumentation in a flexible and extensible way would be the introduction of a

> second transport context layer in addition to the creation context layer.

Reviewer 2: With the presence of two contexts in a message, how would we envision usage of Propagators to inject and extract two different contexts from a single message?

Should messaging providers implement different getters/setters for each type of context?

Another approach is that when injecting a context, it is always the creation context if it doesn't exist (the first context injected context is always the creation context). If the creation context exists, then an injected context is implicitly the transport context. On extraction, assume it is always the transport context being extracted (where the creation context *is* the transport context if the transport context isn't explicitly present). This means the only problem is how to extract the creation context. If it is only auto-instrumented SDK's that will use this context in order to link a consumer span with a producer span, then perhaps this can be an implementation detail within the SDK that doesn't need to be exposed via a public interface?

I know some of these details may feel out of scope, but if the intent is to allow the current spec to allow for transport tracing to occur without a prescription for exactly how it's done, and if the intent is to introduce it in a later revision without breaking what is currently in the spec, we should be able to answer these questions now.

Author: Thanks for bringing this OTEP to a wider audience and for bringing up those questions. The following is my understanding.

We made the requirement, that the creation is attached to a message in a way so that it is not possible to be changed by intermediaries. This makes it like a permanent "stamp" on the message: regardless of what propagators intermediaries use and regardless of how they use it, the creation context should never change.

> Another approach is that when injecting a context, it is always the creation context if it doesn't exist

This is more of a gut feeling, but I think there have to be different kinds of propagators for creation and transport context. Currently existing propagators extract and inject transport context. This can be extended by having an additional propagator that extracts and injects creation context. Every component/intermediary that is messaging-agnostic can use standard propagators that work on the transport context (e. g. HTTP web servers). Components that are messaging-aware can additionally use propagators that work on the creation context.

> I know some of these details may feel out of scope, but if the intent is to allow the current spec to allow for transport tracing to occur without a prescription for exactly how it's done, and if the intent is to introduce it in a later revision without breaking what is currently in the spec, we should be able to answer these questions now.

Yes, anything we come up with should not block the introduction of intermediary instrumentation. One good way to eliminate concerns would be to come up with a rough prototype that shows how intermediary instrumentation could be done. I came up with a prototype some time ago, it might be worth extending that by looking at how propagators could be used.

1. The _creation context layer_ allows correlating the producer with the
   consumers of a message, regardless of intermediary instrumentation. The
   creation context is created by the producer and must be propagated to the
   consumers. It must not be altered by intermediaries.

   This layer helps to model dependencies between producers and consumers,
   regardless of the underlying messaging transport mechanism and its
   instrumentation.
2. An additional _transport context layer_ allows correlating the producer and
   the consumer with an intermediary. It also allows to correlate multiple

>    intermediaries among each other. The transport context can be changed by

Reviewer 9: The correlation should be message based. "Correlating intermediaries" sounds like broker framework related work. Do we want to provide tools to make that easier? Which ones?

   intermediaries, according to intermediary instrumentations. Intermediaries that
   are not instrumented might simply drop the transport context.

   This layer helps to gain insights into details of the message transport.

This would keep the existing correlation between producers and consumer intact,
while allowing intermediaries to use the transport context to correlate
intermediary instrumentation with existing producer and consumer
instrumentations.

### Standards for context propagation

Currently, instrumentors have to decide how to attach and extract context from
messages in order to fulfill the [requirements for context propagation](#context-propagation).
While preserving the freedom for instrumentor to choose how to propagate
context, in the future these conventions should list recommended ways of how to

> propagate context using popular messaging protocols.

Reviewer 10: Hi, just leaving a comment as I came across [an issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/issues/1202) that can be resolved if some sort of standards are in place.

If you refer to the issue above, it is apparent that there is already a divergence of approaches to propagate context with different instrumentors in different languages. I wonder if more attention should be given to establishing a convention before everyone starts doing things differently and becoming out of control.

Reviewer 4: Hi @melvinkcx 
A while ago this OTEP https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/main/text/trace/0205-messaging-semantic-conventions-context-propagation.md was merged to make the context propagation a bit more explicit. 

It doesn't go in exact details on how this should be done (where in the message to put the context, under which "name" etc) because there's no finalized standards for it. The OTEP only makes it clear that the context should be transported together with the message and should be immutable. Since each protocol/messaging system does something different, it's hard to come up with a specification that works for everyone. Our intentions for now is to define the minimum on how propagation will work, and leave to instrumentation to implement it using their appropriate idioms. For ex, this draft [document for AMQP](https://w3c.github.io/trace-context-amqp/#trace-context-fields-placement-in-a-message) tells to add the context in `application-properties`. 

Of course, once stable specifications are available, we will update the recommendations in the OTel conventions, like the AMQP one.

Reviewer 10: Thanks for the insights!

Reviewer 7: >  Since each protocol/messaging system does something different, it's hard to come up with a specification that works for everyone

How about specifying just a guideline / best-practice like: "Call the propagator on the message headers or equivalent"

Reviewer 4: I opened a PR to bring the contents of the OTP into the spec. Maybe that already gives the direction we need, without having to be precise on where to add. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2750

Reviewer 9: One interesting line on the W3C document for AMQP linked above:
"...AMQP message section "application-properties" is immutable collection of properties"
They recommend to use application-properties because is immutable data that brokers cannot change. This aligns with the immutable Creation Context from above. 
The MQTT doc doesn't mention immutability but defines user-properties and the method to use

Reviewer 8: @brunobat and that's for MQTT v5 you are referring to I guess. Thinking at MQTT 3.1.1 there is no notion of application/user properties, everything is in your payload.

processing callbacks, which can then be instrumented by the libraries or SDKs).

While it is possible to create "Process" spans and correlate those with
consumer traces in certain cases, this is not something that can be generally
required. Therefore, it is more feasible to require the creation of "Receive"
spans to correlate producer with consumer traces. A "Receive" spans must link
to the "Create" spans of all messages that are handled by the respective
"Receive" operation. Depending on the use case, "Receive" spans can correlate
with "Process" spans or other spans modelling processing operations.

The operation modelled by the "Receive" span does not strictly refer to
receiving the message from intermediaries, but instead refers to the
application receiving messages for processing. If messages are fetched from the
intermediary and forwarded to the application in one go, the whole operation
might be covered by a "Receive" span. However, clients might pre-fetch messages
from intermediaries and cache those messages, and only forward messages to the
application at a later time. In this case, the operation of pre-fetching and
caching should not be covered by the "Receive" span.

> 

Reviewer 5: If we're saying we can not create "Process" spans because it's not covered by messaging libraries and SDKs, doesn't a "Receive" span become effectively the same as a "Process" in the case of pre-fetching messages for later forwarding to an application?

How do we know an application is going to process a message in the "Receive" case but not the "Process" one?

Author: "Process" spans should ideally be created, but we cannot generally require it as there situations where it's not possible to create "Process" spans.

I think "Receive" spans don't become the same as "Process" spans. Although I admit that "Receive" is probably not the best name for those spans, I'm open to other suggestions. I tried to come up with a drawing to clarify what's covered by this span:

![Unbenannte Zeichnung](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16337442/146103932-2b87ca3a-f3f7-4543-bef4-f964cae400a3.jpg)

Other spans of the receive stage should be covered by instrumenting the transport layer.

Regarding the relation of the "Receive" span to "Process" spans, we cannot really make hard requirements. There can be a parent/child relationship in some cases, there also can be a link relationship .

Reviewer 4: I think we will end up basically with guidance on both things (receive,process span) and hope that instrumentation/apps follow?

Author: I hope this gets clarified by the differentiation introduced between push and pull based instrumentation. If not, please re-open this conversation.
